Refine pull request review guidelines (#1924)
ESMValGroup/ESMValTool: .github/pull_request_template.md

> <!--

Author: I wanted to avoid having to delete a bunch of text to make place for your own text. In my opinion, the PR template should be ready to fill in, so I moved all the stuff we should delete anyway to a comment. We already have a bunch of comments in the current/previous template anyway, and I don't think this lead to any problems 😅

    Thank you for contributing to our project!

    Please do not delete this text completely, but read the text below and keep
    items that seem relevant. If in doubt, just keep everything and add your
    own text at the top, a reviewer will update the checklist for you.

    While the checklist is intended to be filled in by the technical and scientific
    reviewers, it is the responsibility of the author of the pull request to make
    sure all items on it are properly implemented.
-->

## Description

<!--
    Describe the idea of your changes here to communicate why we should accept

>     this pull request and what problem it solves.

Reviewer: Improved in PR by @stefsmeets

    Before you start, please read our [contribution guidelines](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest/community/introduction.html).

    Please fill in the GitHub issue that is closed by this pull request, e.g. Closes #1903
-->
- Closes/Fixes: #issue_number
- Link to documentation:

* * *

## Before you get started

<!--
    Please discuss your idea with the development team before getting started,
    to avoid disappointment or unnecessary work later. The way to do this is
    to open a new issue on GitHub.
-->

- [ ] [Create an issue](https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/issues) to discuss what you are going to do

## Checklist

- [ ] PR has a descriptive title for the [changelog](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest/changelog.html)
- [ ] Code follows the [style guide](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest/community/introduction.html#code-style)
- [ ] [Documentation](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest/community/introduction.html#documentation) is available

> - [ ] YAML files pass [`pre-commit`](https://esmvaltool--1924.org.readthedocs.build/en/1924/community/introduction.html#pre-commit) or [`yamllint`](https://esmvaltool--1924.org.readthedocs.build/en/1924/community/introduction.html#yaml) checks

Author: Yep, I will add a todo for that!

- [ ] [Provenance information](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest/community/diagnostic.html#recording-provenance) has been added
- [ ] [Recipe runs successfully](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest/community/diagnostic.html#???) on your own machine
- [ ] Recipe runs successfully using [`@esmvalbot`](https://github.com/apps/esmvalbot)
- [ ] Figure(s)/data look as expected
- [ ] Code is well documented

### New or updated [data reformatting script](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest/develop/dataset.html):

- [ ] Numbers/units of the data look [physically meaningful](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest/develop/dataset.html#???)
- [ ] Dataset is added to the [table in the documentation](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest/input.html#supported-datasets)
- [ ] [Tests for the CMORized data](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest/develop/dataset.html#test-the-cmorized-dataset) are available
- [ ] [Clear instructions to obtain the data](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest/develop/dataset.html#???) are available
- [ ] Data set is added to the [OBS data pool](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest/develop/dataset.html#???)

***

To help with the number pull requests:

> - [ ] I have [reviewed](https://esmvaltool--1924.org.readthedocs.build/en/1924/community/review.html#review-of-pull-requests) two other [open pull requests](https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pulls) in this repository

Author: Good point! Do you think this reminder is worth keeping, or should we add something like `(For regular contributors)`?

- [ ] [Documentation](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest/community/introduction.html#documentation) is available
- [ ] Please use `yamllint` to check that your YAML files do not contain mistakes
- [ ] (Only if really necessary) Add any additional dependencies needed for the diagnostic script to setup.py, esmvaltool/install/R/r_requirements.txt or esmvaltool/install/Julia/Project.toml (depending on the language of your script) and also to package/meta.yaml for conda dependencies (includes Python and others, but not R/Julia). Also check that the license of the dependency you want to add and any of its dependencies are compatible with [Apache2.0](https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/blob/master/LICENSE).
* * *

New or updated [recipe/diagnostic](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest/community/diagnostic.html):
## Before you get started

- [ ] Documentation for the recipe/diagnostic is available in the `doc/sphinx/source/recipes` folder and an entry has been added to `index.rst`

> - [ ] [Provenance information](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest/community/diagnostic.html#recording-provenance) has been added and no warnings related to provenance are generated when running the recipe

Reviewer 2: The text about warnings has gone missing, could you add it to the checklist?

Author: Added

    to avoid disappointment or unnecessary work later. The way to do this is
    to open a new issue on GitHub.
-->

New or updated [data reformatting script](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest/develop/dataset.html):
- [ ] [☝ Create an issue](https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/issues) to discuss what you are going to do

- [ ] Add a new dataset to the table in the [documentation](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest/input.html#supported-datasets)
- [ ] Add a test for the CMORized data to recipes/example/recipe_check_obs.yml and run the recipe, to make sure the CMOR checks pass without errors
- [ ] There are clear instructions on how to obtain the data
- [ ] Tag @remi-kazeroni in this pull request, so that the new dataset can be added to the OBS data pool at DKRZ and synchronized with CEDA-Jasmin
## Checklist

Automated checks pass, status can be seen below the pull request:
It is the responsibility of the author to make sure the PR is ready to review. The icons indicate whether the item will be subject to the [🛠 Technical][1] or [🧪 Scientific][2] review.

- [ ] Circle/CI tests pass. If the tests are failing, click the `Details` link to find out why.

> - [ ] Preferably Codacy code quality checks pass, however a few remaining hard to solve Codacy issues are still acceptable. If there is an error, click the link to find out why. If you suspect Codacy may be wrong, please ask by commenting.

Reviewer 2: It looks like the text about a few issues remaining went missing, could you add it somewhere again? Maybe in the checklist?

Author: Added to the contributing guidelines

> - [ ] [🛠][1] PR has a descriptive title for the [changelog](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest/community/introduction.html#Branches-pull-requests-and-code-review)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [ ] [🛠][1] PR has a descriptive title for the [changelog](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest/community/introduction.html#branches-pull-requests-and-code-review)
```

Reviewer: Case sensitive link :-)

> - [ ] [🛠][1] [Circle/CI tests pass](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest/community/introduction.html#Branches-pull-requests-and-code-review)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [ ] [🛠][1] [Circle/CI tests pass](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest/community/introduction.html#branches-pull-requests-and-code-review)
```

> - [ ] [🛠][1] [Circle/CI tests pass](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest/community/introduction.html#branches-pull-requests-and-code-review)

Reviewer 2: Maybe link to https://esmvaltool--1924.org.readthedocs.build/en/1924/community/review.html#check-automated-tests instead?

Author: We thought about that, but that really is the checklist for the review. @nielsdrost and I decided that it is better to link to the more extensive description in the contribution guidelines and in this case there is a relevant section.

Reviewer 2: Maybe I'm missing something here, but I think the checklist in the pull request template should be aligned with the checklist on the review page, with short entries in the pull request template and longer explanations on the review page. If needed, we can then link from the review page to other places in the documentation that have even more information.

Author: The review page is a simple checklist for things to look at. They say nothing about how to actually achieve such check. In that case, linking to the contributing guidelines directly makes more sense, and which is what we did.

Reviewer 3: I like the links to the contributing guidelines. I understand the reasoning that you would want to link to the review page, but with the link to the more extensive descriptions it speeds things up for the reviewers if they have to actually look things up since they do not have to follow two links (first to the review page and then to the contributing guidelines).

Reviewer: Ideally the review checklist and contribution guidelines would match up in structure, so the section headings would _be_ the checklist. We propose to let this be part of a followup PR.

> - [ ] [🛠][1] [Codacy code quality checks pass]((https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest/community/introduction.html#Branches-pull-requests-and-code-review))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [ ] [🛠][1] [Codacy code quality checks pass]((https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest/community/introduction.html#branches-pull-requests-and-code-review))
```

> - [ ] [🛠][1] [Codacy code quality checks pass]((https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest/community/introduction.html#Branches-pull-requests-and-code-review))

Reviewer: This link does not render. Is it the double brackets breaking the link?

> - [ ] [🛠][1] [Documentation builds successfully](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest/community/introduction.html#Branches-pull-requests-and-code-review) on readthedocs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [ ] [🛠][1] [Documentation builds successfully](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest/community/introduction.html#branches-pull-requests-and-code-review) on readthedocs
```

> - [ ] [🧪][2] [Documentation](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest/community/diagnostic.html#documentation) for the recipe/diagnostic clearly describes how the recipe works

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [ ] [🧪][2] [Documentation](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest/community/diagnostic.html#documentation) for the recipe/diagnostic clearly describes what it calculates from a scientific point of view
```

> - [ ] [🧪][2] Recipe runs successfully on your own machine or [`@esmvalbot`](https://github.com/apps/esmvalbot)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [ ] [🧪][2] Recipe runs successfully on [`@esmvalbot`](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest/community/introduction.html#running-tests) or some other machine
```

Reviewer: I think we should not use the term "own machine" as getting it to run on only your laptop is not good enough. Made it a bit more neutral. Also changed the link to the documentation section that will contain info on the bot once the Bot PR is merged.

> - [ ] [🧪][2] Figure(s)/data [look as expected](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest/community/diagnostic.html#recording-provenance)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [ ] [🧪][2] Figure(s)/data [look as expected](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest/community/review.html#scientific-review)
```

Reviewer: I think this is a slightly better, though still does not explain what "expected" is....

Author: Yeah, I also considered this one. 👍

- [ ] [🛠][1] New dependencies are added to the [project requirements](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest/community/diagnostic.html#additional-dependencies)
- [ ] [🧪][2] [Documentation](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest/community/diagnostic.html#documentation) for the recipe/diagnostic clearly describes what it calculates from a scientific point of view
- [ ] [🧪][2] Recipe runs successfully on [`@esmvalbot`](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest/community/introduction.html#running-tests) or some other machine
- [ ] [🧪][2] Figure(s)/data [look as expected](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest/community/review.html#scientific-review)
- [ ] [🧪][2] Code is [well documented](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest/community/introduction.html#what-should-be-documented) and scientifically sound

New or updated [recipe/diagnostic](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest/community/diagnostic.html):
### New or updated [data reformatting script](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest/develop/dataset.html):

- [ ] [The documentation](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest/recipes/index.html) for the new/updated recipes/diagnostics clearly describes what the recipe does and how to use it

> - [ ] The recipe runs successfully on your own machine/cluster or with the [`@esmvalbot`](https://github.com/apps/esmvalbot) without any modifications to the recipe and with all data specified in the recipe

Reviewer 2: The note about no notifications has gone missing, could you add it to the checklist?

Author: Added

> - [ ] 🚀 I have [reviewed](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest/community/review.html#review-of-pull-requests) two other [open pull requests](https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pulls) in this repository

Reviewer: Not sure this will scare off contributors...

Author: Me neither, but I think it will be good to have some kind of notice. I rephrased it a little bit. I'm also OK with removing it.

> - [ ] 🙏 We kindly ask you to [review](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest/community/review.html#review-of-pull-requests) two other [open pull requests](https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/pulls) in this repository

Reviewer 4: I would leave the checkbox here, this might make the impression that the pull request cannot be finished before another 2 pull request have been reviewed....this is not what we want correct? Otherwise I like it, its good that people know how this is supposed to work. But if it is your very first pull request it might scare you off if it looks like a "have to".

Reviewer: So you suggest to remove the checkbox, but leave the item?

Reviewer: Yes, agree we should not scare of first time contributors. :-)

Author: I removed the checkbox in the latest commit, so now it is more like a plea to get people to help out 👍

> [1]: https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest/community/review.html#technical-review

Reviewer: cool, a reference in a markdown file!
